Cancer is a group of diseases characterized by uncontrolled cell growth and the ability to invade other tissues.
Oncogenes are mutated genes that promote cell growth and contribute to cancer development.
Tumor suppressor genes like p53 normally prevent uncontrolled cell division and their inactivation promotes cancer.
Metastasis is the spread of cancer cells from the primary tumor to distant organs through blood or lymph.
Diabetes mellitus is a metabolic disorder characterized by chronically elevated blood glucose levels.
Type 1 diabetes is an autoimmune disease where the immune system destroys insulin-producing beta cells.
Type 2 diabetes results from insulin resistance and inadequate insulin secretion and is associated with obesity.
Cardiovascular disease is the leading cause of death worldwide and includes heart attacks and strokes.
Atherosclerosis is the buildup of plaques in arterial walls that restricts blood flow.
A myocardial infarction or heart attack occurs when blood flow to the heart muscle is blocked.
A stroke occurs when blood flow to the brain is interrupted causing brain cell death.
Alzheimer disease is a neurodegenerative disorder characterized by amyloid plaques and neurofibrillary tangles.
Parkinson disease results from the loss of dopamine-producing neurons in the substantia nigra.
HIV human immunodeficiency virus attacks CD4 T cells and weakens the immune system.
AIDS acquired immunodeficiency syndrome is the advanced stage of HIV infection with severely compromised immunity.
Malaria is caused by Plasmodium parasites transmitted through infected Anopheles mosquito bites.
Tuberculosis is caused by Mycobacterium tuberculosis and primarily affects the lungs.
Influenza viruses mutate rapidly through antigenic drift and shift causing seasonal epidemics and pandemics.
COVID-19 is caused by SARS-CoV-2 a coronavirus that primarily affects the respiratory system.
Autoimmune diseases occur when the immune system mistakenly attacks the body own tissues.
Rheumatoid arthritis is an autoimmune disease that causes chronic inflammation of the joints.
Multiple sclerosis is an autoimmune disease that damages the myelin sheath around nerve fibers.
Sickle cell disease is a genetic disorder causing red blood cells to form an abnormal crescent shape.
Cystic fibrosis is caused by mutations in the CFTR gene affecting chloride channels in epithelial cells.
Antimicrobial resistance is a growing global health threat as pathogens evolve to resist treatment.
Prions are misfolded proteins that cause fatal neurodegenerative diseases like Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease.
Sepsis is a life-threatening organ dysfunction caused by a dysregulated immune response to infection.
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease COPD is an inflammatory lung disease that obstructs airflow.
Osteoporosis weakens bones by reducing bone density and increasing fracture risk.
Depression is a mood disorder involving persistent sadness and loss of interest linked to neurotransmitter imbalances.
