DNA deoxyribonucleic acid is the molecule that carries genetic instructions in all living organisms.
The DNA double helix was discovered by James Watson and Francis Crick in 1953 using X-ray data from Rosalind Franklin.
DNA replication is semiconservative meaning each new double helix contains one old strand and one new strand.
DNA polymerase synthesizes new DNA strands by adding nucleotides complementary to the template strand.
The central dogma of molecular biology states that information flows from DNA to RNA to protein.
Transcription copies a gene DNA sequence into messenger RNA using RNA polymerase.
Translation converts the mRNA sequence into a protein at the ribosome.
Codons are three-nucleotide sequences in mRNA that specify amino acids during translation.
The genetic code is nearly universal with 64 codons encoding 20 amino acids and 3 stop signals.
Transfer RNA carries amino acids to the ribosome and matches them to the correct codon via its anticodon.
Introns are non-coding sequences that are removed from pre-mRNA by splicing.
Exons are coding sequences that are joined together to form the mature mRNA.
Alternative splicing allows a single gene to produce multiple different protein variants.
Gene expression is regulated by transcription factors that bind to promoter and enhancer regions.
Epigenetics studies heritable changes in gene expression that do not involve changes to the DNA sequence.
DNA methylation typically silences gene expression by adding methyl groups to cytosine bases.
Histone modification alters chromatin structure to activate or repress gene transcription.
CRISPR-Cas9 is a gene editing tool that can precisely cut and modify DNA sequences.
CRISPR was originally discovered as a bacterial immune defense system against viruses.
Polymerase chain reaction PCR amplifies specific DNA sequences by millions of copies.
Gel electrophoresis separates DNA fragments by size using an electric field.
The Human Genome Project completed in 2003 sequenced all 3.2 billion base pairs of human DNA.
Humans have approximately 20000 to 25000 protein-coding genes.
Single nucleotide polymorphisms SNPs are the most common type of genetic variation among people.
Genome-wide association studies identify genetic variants associated with diseases and traits.
Gene therapy introduces functional genes into cells to treat genetic disorders.
RNA interference silences gene expression by degrading specific mRNA molecules.
Telomeres are repetitive DNA sequences at chromosome ends that protect against degradation.
Telomerase is an enzyme that extends telomeres and is active in stem cells and cancer cells.
Transposons are mobile genetic elements that can move within genomes and cause mutations.
